[Music]
I'm not just sort of forbusiness.com and
with me today is Dr Thomas Seyfried he's
a professor at Boston College and a
prominent researcher in the field of
cancer biology and metabolic Theory like
the super is really a pleasure to chat
to you well thank you very much Nadia
it's nice to hear be here and speak with
you as well
I can hardly believe my luck I mean this
room never really happens but
an international team of researchers had
a study that was reported on today and
you were going to be
co-authors which found a non-toxic
combination pairing a specialized diet
and a tumor fighting drug which destroys
two major cells in an aggressive
diablastoma it's an aggressive brain
cancer
this is groundbreaking can you talk me
through this study the findings
yes
um well we know uh brain cancer
especially glioblastoma
uh is is like one of the worst if not
the worst type of of cancer that a
person
a person can have and also little kids
children can have pineal blastomas
they're very similar uh except they they
occur in a younger brain but their
outcome is just as as devastating
um what what we have uh identified over
many many years of research
um based on Otto warburg's original
observations
all of the different
neoplastic cells inside of a
glioblastoma
are predominantly using a fermentation
metabolism to generate energy and what
that essentially means is they generate
energy without the use of oxygen and
um and what they call a glial they used
to call it glioblastoma multi-formy
because this types of cells that were in
there were always so complicated and
dysmorphic and all this kind of stuff
and you know many many Studies have
shown hundreds and thousands of gene
mutations and all these kinds of cells
but according to our metabolic
hypothesis the mitochondrial metabolic
theory of cancer
um the origin of the of the disease
arises from damage to the respiration
of the cells and all of the cells then
would have to ferment that is generate
energy without oxygen regardless of what
the cells look like all the neoplastic
cells in in the glioblastoma are using
energy without oxygen and that comes
from just two fuels glucose and
glutamine the sugar glucose and the
amino acid glutamine
one of the problems with glioblastoma
it's a horrible horrible survival
statistics which have not changed in
almost 100 years if you can believe this
when you when you think about all of the
accomplishments of humankind in the last
hundred years uh astonishing
advances in science and technology a web
telescope that orbits the earth a
million miles and could look at the
origin and yet we have not made one
major advance in keeping people alive
with glioblastoma can you believe this
and one of the there's a couple of major
problems with this is one is the
misunderstanding of what cancer is and
including glioblastoma it's not a
genetic disease it's a metabolic disease
that's number number one number two is
that continue to radiation of the brain
in people that have these tumors and we
have published very very clear evidence
that when you take when a person is
diagnosed with glioblastoma
the radiation of the brain frees up the
two fuels the metabolic fuels the
glucose and the glutamine needed uh to
drive the growth of the tumor so the
very process of treating a person a
person with it's bad enough that the
person has this tumor it's worse when
you treat it with a therapy that frees
up the two fuels that drive the tumor
leading to the rapid death and demise of
the majority of people that have these
tumors there will be no advance in
managing glioblastoma until we stop
irradiating the brain of people that
have glioblastoma I have published and
my colleagues have published papers upon
papers showing the details of what I'm
saying yet it's whatever reason it is
ignored by the scientific Community I
have no idea what what could account for
someone to use a therapy that would lead
to the rapid demise of their very
patients yet we have shown
when you irradiate the brain you free up
the two fuels that drive energy without
oxygen that is the sugar glucose and the
amino acid glutamine the glucose listen
when you irradiate somebody blood sugar
goes up high and the bread the brain the
head begins to warm because of the
radiation so you give high-dose steroids
which make blood sugar go even higher
the radiation breaks apart these very
intricate psych cell uh connections
between neurons and glia freeing up
massive amounts of glutamine it's
unbelievable and then these poor folks
are all dying the the the death from
glioblastoma is so reproducible in every
major medical school throughout the
world it's unbelievable you cannot
design a more perfect experiment to lead
to the demise of your patients than the
current standard of care for
glioblastoma I have no clue how the
words that I am saying are completely
misunderstood by anyone treating
patients with glioblastoma it's
unbelievable so we have a a person that
chose no radiation no chemo no no none
of this and he's still alive in England
Pablo Kelly
um he said I don't want radiation I
don't want chemo I don't want any of
this stuff he had surgery we think
surgery is an extremely important tool
for managing glioblastoma
um if you if you can get rid of the
tumor both debulking we call it
debulking and metabolic therapy can
shrink the tumor so surgical
debulking becomes even more effective so
we think surgery is absolutely essential
for the management of glioblastoma if
done correctly with metabolic therapy a
therapy that restricts the availability
of the glucose and the glutamine does
not disturb the tumor micro environment
so we can shrink it down reduce the
inflammation surgery can take the
majority of this tumor out and we think
patients will live far far longer than
they do today if they do things the
correct way first of all you have to
realize it's not a genetic disease so
get over this crazy stuff about trying
to Target mutations and all this stuff
that's based on a a a a a a wrong Theory
it's a metabolic Theory it can't live
without glucose and glutamine and they
also can't use fatty acids or Ketone
bodies so they so a man a successful
management for glioblastoma becomes
transitioning the patient over the
nutritional ketosis lowers blood sugar
elevates Ketone bodies which the tumor
cells cannot use so you marginalize them
and then you come in with drugs and
procedures to Target glucose and
glutamine this will allow patients to
stay alive two three four times longer
than they and with a higher quality of
life why is this not done
we have to start asking the medical
community why is this not done and
that's the the great mystery and if
people want to challenge this all you
have to do is look at the survival
statistics and understand the metabolism
of cancer and you will understand why
your patients aren't surviving
it seems to me from what you're saying
that tense is an environmental and a
lifestyle disease well I mean there's no
way we don't know what the cause is of
glioblastone it could have many many
different causes so a life it's not a
lifestyle issue with respect to its
origin it can be a lifestyle
modification once the tumor is diagnosed
so the origin of glioblastoma can come
from viral infections that come from
trauma to the Head it can come from
exposure to chemicals it can come from a
lot of different reasons but once you
have that diagnosis then there becomes a
clear strategy for managing that cancer
uh very very different than what we're
doing to these patients today
well you mentioned that it can be
treated with metabolic therapies
um ketogenic diet as far as I understand
is one of those
what are the metabolic therapies and
what do they entail well okay well the
the ketogenic diet uh or calorie
restriction or say water only fasting
any any of these procedures what they do
is they lower the blood sugar that's
needed to drive the tumor they're also
powerfully anti-inflammatory so many of
these cancers are loaded with tremendous
amounts of inflammation the micro
environment is is inflamed all of that
stuff can be significantly reduced if uh
water people say well water only fasting
who can do that well you have a choice
you can either do that or you can die
from the tumor I mean there's there's
not you don't have many options
um but on the other hand a calorie
restricted ketogenic diet or any diet
that lowers blood sugar and elevates
ketones which we have shown we've
actually developed the glucose Ketone
index monitor to allow cancer patients
not only glioblastoma almost all cancers
are very similar similar they're all
fermenters they all they all need
glucose and glutamine
um you know you have a a meter that can
be used the keto Mojo meter that can be
used to tell a cancer patients how low
their blood sugar is and how either
ketones are and when they get into a
particular Zone you're going to be
killing tumor cells uh once that once
you get into that zone then we then we
use glutamine targeting drugs as a
matter of fact
um that one of the big challenges in
managing brain cancer is delivering
drugs through what we call the
blood-brain barrier
when you when you put a patient into
therapeutic nutritional ketosis you can
easily deliver small molecules to the to
the tumor we publish papers showing this
you don't need some fancy chemical you
just have to put the patient into
therapeutic ketosis and then deliver
glutamine targeting drugs small
quantities of these you don't even need
a lot very small amounts of these drugs
will be massively effective when when
used with uh ketogenic metabolic therapy
so it's a diet drug Synergy to manage
these cancers without causing toxicity
is a nice thing too you don't have to
have your hair fall out you have to have
all these horrible nausea and vomiting
and all this kind of crazy stuff you can
actually manage the candy I mean yes
you'll feel hungry on occasion but your
body gets to adjust this
it adapts you adapt to this and the
tumor cells get hammered and they start
shriveling up and dying and and the
patients live a lot longer with a much
higher quality of life and this will be
the future it just takes time for people
to understand what I'm saying
before we go further I'd like to
understand these two
sort of conflicting theories of
what cancer is what is the prevailing
genetic theory of cancer as a disease
and then the contrasting mitochondrial
metabolic definition of cancer yeah well
I mean right now if you go to the
National Cancer Institute in the United
States which is part of the NIH National
institute's Health it says right on
their website cancer is a genetic
disease caused by mutations I mean
nothing could be further from the truth
uh it's just a it's a a dogmatic
ideology uh you know it's a silent
assumption that has been driven into the
brains not only from the NCI but also
throughout the world you go to England
Germany they all think cancer is a
genetic disease I mean we have clearly
shown through nuclear transfer
experiments I summarized dozens and
dozens of experiments showing that uh
the mutations in the nucleus cannot be
the drivers of dysregulated cell growth
which is cancer we have then they said
well we only have to serve these driver
driver mutations are the ones that are
responsible for this they even turned
this not all the mutations are bad only
the drivers well now we're realizing we
have all of us have large numbers of
driver mutations in cells that never
become cancer so uh clearly uh this and
also uh you know cancer is more of a
modern problem than it was in the past
Aboriginal tribes and uh was very rare
to have to find cancer
um in any of our humans that followed
traditional ways ways of life our
closest relatives the the chimpanzee
they never documented a breast cancer
breast a case of breast cancer at a
female chimpanzee yet breast cancer in
the United States has now replaced
um heart disease is the number one
killer of women uh you know so clearly
the the genetics of the chimpan us are
almost the same our Aboriginal ancestors
are the same as us and cancer is
extremely rare so it's it's an
environmental problem uh the mutations
actually come
this is where we need to know what the
mitochondrial metabolic theory is which
arose with the work of Otto Warburg so
when mitochondria become damaged they
throw out which we call Ross Ros what
are mitochondria oh well we have a cell
all the cells in our body contain a
nucleus and that has Gene the the
largely our our genome most of our
genome is in is in the nucleus and
nucleus reproduction
yeah so a cell division is needed you
know the nucleus is separated and we
removed it so absolutely uh you have a
nucleus but you also have many other
organelles you know you have various
kinds of membranes lysosomes but the
major the main organelle is the
mitochondria
this arose from an ancient bacteria that
fused uh I don't know maybe it was I
think
two 8.8 million years ago just when
oxygen started to come into the
atmosphere some some two and a half
billion years it allowed cells to form
multicellular organisms okay
multicellular organ before that everyone
everything we all existed at one point
as a single cell living in a hypoxic
environment can you believe this I mean
even even even the smartest people and
the greatest people in the world all
started off as a single cell at one
point in our existence on the planet
even warbur the great Einstein existed
started off as a single cell so uh
at that time there was no oxygen so they
just divided like crazy and it wasn't
until oxygen came into the atmosphere uh
and was able to be captured by another
kind of bacteria which was the
origination of the mitochondria so the
mitochondria is like another organism
inside the cell it has its own DNA and
it has its it is actually the controller
of our existence on of the planet that
the mitochondria it regulates energy
metabolism inside the cell so the cell
knows what to do when it when it needs
to do this all driven and and the
nucleus is a is kind of a slave of the
mitochondria the nucleus pretty much
does whatever the mitochondria thing
should be done so when the mitochondria
become dysfunctional and inoperable the
cell reverts back to its ancient ways of
disregulated cell growth and in order in
order for it to grow that way it has to
ferment it uses fuels that don't require
oxygen and and we and others have shown
those fuels are glucose and glutamine so
and the Very earliest existence of life
on Earth there was fermentation
fermentation is the ability to get
energy ATP without oxygen and all of
these cancer cells whether it's a
glioblastoma or lung cancer colon cancer
breast cancer bladder cancer they're all
using a very similar common mechanism
energy without oxy without oxygen
fermentation so you say what can they
ferment and we and others have shown it
is the sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine so if you want to kill cancer
cells you must deprive them of their
fermentable fuels and the strategy that
requires this is based on the on the
mitochondrial metabolic theory of cancer
not the somatic mutation theory of
cancer so once you know that cancer is
driven by fermentation and the origin of
cancer comes from damage to the
organelle mitochondria then you know how
you should be managing cancer you have
to transition the whole body to a fuel
that the tumor cells can't use they
cannot ferment fatty acids or Ketone
bodies they can ferment only glucose and
glutamine is I it's not that complicated
once you understand the global issues
that you're dealing with people just
want to make everything so complicated
and they're all working under an
incorrect Theory and if you're working
under an incorrect Theory you're never
going to achieve the outcome that you
would have expected in the first place
for me that's just completely conflict
with what you just said and that's one
of them being
that the general approach to cancer is
that every Cancer is different and it
needs to be sort of fought on a
case-to-case basis
yeah that's incorrect yeah the second
just sort of big red flag is
that
focus on ketones and ketogenic diet and
just behavioral modifications in terms
of lifestyle and environment and those
kinds of things have
been successful in reversing type 2
diabetes
um you know doctors like Dr Chris Palmer
also believes that the mental illnessism
metabolic illness so it just it feels
like there are just so many signs going
in this direction but that leads me to
what you were
sort of just questioning earlier which
is if it's this obvious
why
so you must have some theories a health
authorities are lauded for you know
fighting cancer winning cancer this is
how what in what makes this happening
yeah you're right about that you know I
think you have to look at the
institutions that are
um you know dependent on cancer being a
metabolic disease well correction the
institutions depend that are dependent
on cancer being a genetic disease
yeah it's a it's a big industry
um you know and I know to transition
from what we're currently doing which is
largely ineffective uh to what could be
remarkably effective it will take some
time but you know
um
this transition then so to take time to
understand what I'm saying and adapt it
to the clinic unfortunately we have to
sacrifice so many cancer patients
um people that could be alive and doing
well
um we have to let them die miserably uh
uh only because it takes a time it takes
a while for the institutions to uh you
know re-adapt themselves and say well
I'm sorry you know uh we we just have to
let all you folks die because we're not
really geared up to uh treat your
disease the way it should be treated
um I mean we've invested billions and
billions of dollars into chemotherapies
and all these Technologies and and
immunotherapies they're all based on the
on the somatic mutation Theory and if
that theory is incorrect the outcome
uh may not be good now the the idea is
that yeah we have some people that that
survive massive doses of chemo and
radiation and we have some people that
survive these immunotherapies but we
also have many many many people dying
from radiation and chemo and we have
many many people dying from
immunotherapies in the form of what we
call hyper Progressive disease where the
treatment actually kills the patient
before the cancer does uh and you know
they die from the complications of Camp
what does that mean well they they
probably kill the poor patient uh with
the therapies you should never ever have
to treat another member of our species
with anything that has a remote
possibility of killing them in the
attempt to make their health better
right it doesn't make any sense rarely
do you die from a from a low
carbohydrate high fat diet taken in
small amounts you don't die from that I
don't know anybody who's died from that
you know but you you're you struck a
real a nerve there and you have to ask
folks that are irradiating people and
you treating them with very toxic drugs
why are you doing that you know what is
the oh no this is what we all do well
well all I mean you just have to do it
because everybody else is doing it I
mean you have no functional brain cells
you can't look and see that this may not
be working working well you know so I
look at this and I'm saying it's going
to change yeah absolutely will it change
because we're not going to continue to
do this crazy stuff for another hundred
years we just can't allow all these good
folks to be dying and poison irradiated
suffering miserably you know surgically
mutilated I mean you you can't believe
the horror stories that are going on in
these cancer clinics uh treating people
it's almost medieval in in what we're
doing to these poor folks only because
we have a business model in place that
can't change so
um anyway it's it's got a it's got a lot
of things going with it it's a very
systemic problem I think because I mean
to what extent are the doctors not
allowed to
be open with their patients about
alternative treatments because of you
know pressure on them yeah well I think
that's an important point I think there
has there has to be some flexibility uh
right now the AMA American Medical
Association in fact it's not all you am
it's everywhere I I don't find
everywhere I go on the planet they're
doing the same kinds of crazy stuff
um you know it seems to be some sort of
uh I don't know uh
the an effect on the on the whole
institution why you have to do this
stuff no matter you go to South South
Africa I mean they're doing the same
thing there that they are doing in
Dana-Farber Cancer Center here in Boston
or MD Anderson all this they're all
doing the same kinds of crazy stuff
everybody's trying to Gene sequence
stuff everybody's looking for signaling
Cascades and you know and I said why you
pull the plug on their fuels they die
well you have to worry about all this
other stuff what are you worried about
all this kind of crazy stuff for when
you when if the cell dies and the
patient is healthy and looking good you
know uh why are you worried about all
these minutia stuff and um yeah so
there's a lot of issues here you know
it's that we have to come to realize the
the most important thing is to recognize
that cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease and we're we're correcting
Otto warburg's original observations
showing where he was correct and where
he was not correct and we're uh
polishing up that whole concept
we're going to come out with a major
paper showing how Otto Warburg was in
fact right about the origin of cancer
unfortunately uh Warburg never knew or
wasn't able to take his knowledge and
develop it into an effective therapeutic
strategy so we're doing that so we're
cleaning up warburg's uh ideas showing
where he was right and how and where he
wasn't and then we're developing a
therapy based on that and that will
eventually become the standard of care
for cancer
what was his
theory on the origin of cancer which you
say remains
yeah what uh Warburg a very interesting
uh character uh Sam Apple just wrote the
book uh ravenous that describes
warburg's I mean he was an interesting
character it was from his work from the
1920s on after he got out of the first
world war oh yeah you should read the
story he was a
aristocratic uh German from the Prussian
area of Germany and uh his whole history
of friends and family were all of these
very successful businessmen and
scientists but um he knew early on that
uh cancer had a very unique metabolic
phenotype they fermented they you know
the nice thing about the the interesting
thing Warburg clearly showed I mean if
you took a a rat with a tumor on its
body and gave the rat cyanide cyanide
kills people real quick you know it
takes iodide you're dead within within
one minute but uh the the rat died
instantly but the cancer cells were fine
so uh they don't need oxygen that's what
I'm saying these cancer cells can live
in cyanide yeah yeah so so if a person
if a person were to have a tumor in
their body and they would say well I
don't want to live on the planet anymore
I want to take my own life they would
take the cyanide they would be dead but
their tumor would be fine
I know it's nuts but it sounds nuts but
Warburg did some of those experiments
years ago and that told us right away
that cancer cells don't need oxygen for
survival so what do they need and they
ferment and he said that and then the
gene the the gene crazies got involved
with this and they said oh no it's all a
genetic thing no it's not the gene
mutations are an effect of the damage
the deoxidative phosphorylation we're
trying to straighten this out it's
unbelievable but when you have uh
ideological Dogma when you it's you
cannot change the brain of a dogmatic of
a ideal lock
um there's no way you're going to get
some guy who is a devout member of one
religion to immediately abandon it and
jump into the other that's called
ideology it's a it's a it's like a
paralysis of of thinking and we see it's
everywhere it's a paralysis of thinking
so when you have scientists that are
absolutely lockstep with the idea that
cancer is a genetic disease no matter
what you say no matter what evidence you
present these guys just can't accept it
as if it were some sort of a religion
they're in their involvement so uh so
we're we're going for the people let the
people make the determination the more
and more stage four cancer patients that
survive
um uh they say well how come you're
alive and everybody else is not you say
well I did metabolic therapy oh I want
to know about that what do you have to
do and we're writing out the treatment
protocols now as we speak So eventually
clinics will be set up to do this and
more and more people will be surviving
as the result of this it just takes time
I'd like to get into the particulars
about those trials but
I cannot help but see the parallels
between
this illusion of consensus that we see
in all spheres of Science and
professions it's uncomfortable to have
to change your mind oh yeah it's it's
very uncomfortable to have to change
your mind and admit that you might have
been wrong
and also uh uh when you're well paid to
to think it's very hard to get somebody
to believe something when their salary
depends on the not believe in it that
was from Upton Sinclair up to Sinclair
said that so so yeah I mean the the
amounts of Revenue generation from
treating cancer uh it could be you know
one of the interesting things that I I
just found out that
um in the Wall Street Journal you can
find out an awful lot about cancer just
by reading the Wall Street Journal
um that really tells you what's going on
in the cancer industry you know where
the stocks are up oh yeah I in my cancer
class I have my students read The Wall
Street Journal you can get more
information about cancer from that from
that uh media publication than you can
from any of the scientific textbooks you
know it just shows you where all the
energy in the in the field of cancer is
going but you know one of the
interesting things that came out was
that the the attempts of the democratic
Administration in the United States was
to reduce drug costs uh the cost of
medications because you know in the
United States we pay more for medication
than almost everybody else pays for this
so one of the big plans from the Biden
Administration was let's reduce let's
reduce the cost of medications one of
the consequences with that is now
there's the shortage of cancer drugs
drugs for the cancer uh field because
they said well if you're going to reduce
the Dr the price we're going to make
less of these drugs so so what you have
now is a shortage of cancer drugs and
yet when you do metabolic therapy one of
the things interesting about metabolic
therapy is you don't need many drugs the
amount of drug that you need now can be
one-tenth what it used to be and it
works even better these cancer drugs
will work better when administered under
metabolic approach when in a nutritional
ketotic State you don't need much drugs
so actually this could work out really
well for everybody we don't have enough
drugs the drugs the lower drugs will
work even better when you have metabolic
therapy so just it just takes time for
people to understand all this you know
it's just that's what concerns me though
because I mean you posited the
theory of cancer as a metabolic disease
um you know with a variation on warbig's
initial Theory
more than a decade ago
it was well read it was picked up
it's 10 years or more later and they
haven't been sufficient trials people
are still sticking to the genetic theory
what's different now that these trials
will go ahead yeah yeah well you have to
realize we have two issues here one is
the one I told you about the The
Institute changing institutions is not
easy the other the other the other
um blowback that we get within the
scientific field
and the same the same era that Warburg
made from the initial uh observation was
oxygen consumption
so if you study cancer most people do
research in cancer cells growing in in a
culture dish
not as much they do a lot of work of
course in in Vivo model systems uh
pre-clinical model systems but they also
study a lot of cancer research in the
cultured dish
well if you look at the oxygen
consumption of cultured cancer cells you
say they take in tremendous amounts of
ox some of them not all of them uh they
take in oxygen and one of the great uh
Mis misconceptions which we have now
resolved we and others the oxygen
consumption doesn't mean oxidative
phosphorylation is normal so people were
looking at oxygen consumption as if
mitochondria were healthy in cancer
cells therefore the mitochondrial
metabolic Theory cannot warburg's Theory
cannot be correct because the cancer
cell is sucking down oxygen at the same
rate as some normal cells therefore
Warburg must be wrong
now what happened we showed that the
oxygen consumption in the cancer cell is
not used for energy it's used to make
reactive oxygen species Ros
cause the mutations in the nucleus so
where the cancer cell is taking an
oxygen but it's like uh it's like
missing it's like incorrect it's not
using it for energy so that show shows
that Warburg himself made this kind of
same mistake and so they got into this
big brouhaha in the scientific field oh
the cancer cell has normal mitochondria
oh no the cancer cell has abnormal
mitochondria you know all this other
stuff so we're we're clearing all that
mess away we're clearing straighten it
out cancer cells cannot use oxygen and
any way to generate uh it's not
sufficient let's go this way no cancer
cells cannot use oxidative
phosphorylation alone to survive they
have to have fermentation they must have
fermentation driven by glucose and
glutamine so the strategy for managing
cancer becomes very very clear how to do
this except that you have this so people
will say well you know I don't know if
you're right we have to reproduce and
reproduce dozens of there's always some
non-scientific argument to say why why
you can't nobody wants to change they
want to continue to do what they do so
uh but yet we have all these die we have
in the con in this country we have one
over almost 1700 people a day dying from
cancer every day for some kind
of argument that we have solved along
with with Warburg so I just find that
we're sacrificing human beings uh for
reasons that don't have to happen and
but the institutions to change it's just
so hard and it's too radical for them to
change at this point in time so we must
have these poor cancer patients suffer
and die as the result of this of this
conundrum
how are you funding your trials my
support from my research comes largely
from private foundations and
philanthropy there are people on this
planet that understand what I am doing
and they are they don't really care
whether they make a buck on it or not
they just want to be part of the chain
the revolution that's coming it's the
revolution in medicine based on this
that's coming and some people say you
know I might want to I want I might want
to be thought of as being a part of this
change and there's a movie coming out
called the cancer Revolution that's
based largely in the stuff that we did
and we're now we're beginning to collect
all of these so-called flukes these guys
that had all these stage four cancers
that are all doing fine as the result of
doing metabolic therapy so you know when
they say where's your clinic I can't
believe anything until you do a clinical
trial you know that's as well
you know even if you do some of this
stuff they still drag their feet we did
it for epilepsy and they still want to
use drugs when we show clearly showed
ketogenic diet was to do for her
epilepsy but you know who's going to
fund the clinical trial to show that we
can manage cancer effectively with yeah
right I mean who's going to step forward
to do this right so what we have to do
is we have to continue to show large
numbers of people who continue to
survive and they become Advocates and
then people are going to say what did
you do how did you do that you know I
did metabolic therapy and and we're in
the process now of writing a very
comprehensive treatment protocol so that
Physicians will know exactly what to do
and how to do it for the majority of
cancer patients the the Pet Scan
management liquid biopsies we can do an
awful lot of things we can we can
dovetail a lot of the newer Technologies
into metabolic therapy so we just have
to rearrange some of the some of the
chairs but we can still bring a lot of
the same uh evaluation techniques that
that are currently being used into the
new into the new plan except that now we
don't have to really
use such toxic and expensive poisons and
things to to manage the disease and I
think the outcome is going to be really
really good for man managing managing
cancers you know and as far as the the
prevention goes people say oh man listen
most people are there they don't do
prevention you know
um so it's really what you're going to
do once I have cancer once the person
has cancer what can you do for me
um and that's where this that's where
the big programs are going to come in
management effective management
so what would you just briefly recommend
as for events to measures
well a prevention you know you as I said
the origin of cancer comes from chronic
damage to the mitochondria and the
ability of that organelle to produce
energy through oxygen so there are any
number of ways by which cancer can occur
in a person uh over uh many many years
through chronic disruption of of energy
metabolism in some cell and some tissue
in some organ and as I said if your
mitochondria remain healthy you won't
get cancer or cancer would be extremely
rare as it was in our Aboriginal uh
ancestors and the folks that are still
uh following traditional ways very rare
and as I said Albert Schweitzer who
actually did a lot of his work in Africa
um he evaluated some 40 000 people I
think Tim knox's book uh it talks about
how many people Albert Schweitzer looked
they didn't find cancer he said why
these people have no cancer because they
were following their traditional ways
they had a lot of exercise uh they had a
lot of low carbohydrate Foods in their
diet and
um your body is so resistant to cancer
in order to to get cancer you really
need to abuse your body chronically for
long periods of time because we're
designed not to get cancer just like the
chimpanzee doesn't get cancer the
gorilla orangutans these kinds of things
and they're under constant surveillance
all the time in these in these zoos
um and then when I I went to the the zoo
out there in San Diego where they have
these bonobos and and and other of these
other kinds of things and and I said how
come you guys do you ever feed them
jelly donuts and pizza and stuff like oh
no no that's called that would be animal
cruelty I said well they have the same
genetics as we are
hi sister well we have diabetes heart
disease Wellness the cancer
um we're pounding down you know Big Macs
and all kinds of stuff and then we
wonder why we're getting cancer the
chimpanzee well you don't want to eat
the you know wait I you don't want to go
on a chimp diet either you gotta eat or
monkey meat and eat insects and stuff
like that apart from carcinogens and
information and
these kinds of things that
you can scientifically see the process
by via which they make you sick and get
cancer
what about human beings that live
healthy lives
they don't smoke they're not drinkers
they exercise
what is the possible scientific
explanation or biological explanation
for them to just one day get cancer well
you know we have to look at our
environment and the environment that
we're in you know most of most western
societies now it's not it's not just one
thing that could produce uh cancer I
mean you have a diet a lifestyle issue
you're also exposed uh to all kinds of
things in the environment you know in
our in natural environments I mean we're
driving on highways that have all kinds
of toxic material coming out of cars
where where we're just we just have a a
new environment different from our
ancestral environments like the
Paleolithic time of our existence and
some of the as I said the Aboriginal
tribes where cancer is very very low so
what is it in our Western diet and
lifestyle issues that could provoke
cancer uh we we have oncogenic viruses
we have intermittent hypoxia sleep apnea
we have a lot of different things
combined and people say well I don't
know I eat a very healthy diet lifestyle
well what is that diet in a lifestyle
you know what are your GK what is your
glucose levels and ketones when we
evolved as a species we were always in
some level of ketosis because we didn't
have any carbohydrate High highly
processed carbs in our environment so
you know uh we we have things today that
are very very different and and this
explosion of cancer has only happened
over the last you know 7 500 years I
mean it's not like it was always with us
uh we we didn't just all of a sudden hey
you know everybody's got cancer now it's
it's happening as the result of our
technological environment the lifestyle
that we're Western Society Lifestyles
come into a into an environment and
people start getting cancer type 2
diabetes cardiovascular disease they're
all related to the same problem you know
chronic inflammation My ultimate
question is if there's a possibility
that stress and negative energy and
something that can biologically sort of
work its way into your system and
manifest physically
is that scientifically possible
absolutely the the uh chronic stress
depression a lot of these things are
also provocative agents leading to
dysfunctional respiration and mental
illness I mean there's a lot of things
that could be going on here any one of
which are usually combinations of them
so it's very hard to pinpoint exactly uh
why such and such a a person may may
have this disease or chronic disease or
that chronic disease but you know uh in
cancer we we certainly know there are a
number of provocative agents that can
damage oxidative phosphorylation that is
mitochondrial respiration and you
combine that with several of the other
things and all together you put yourself
now at risk for at risk and then people
say Well it must be genetic because we
have these inherited genes uh in that
run in families that put you at like
bracha one mutation some of these but
there we've looked into every one of
those and and every one of those uh
damages oxidative phosphorylation in one
way or or another so the origin of the
cancer is is damaged mitochondrial
function whether it's caused by a
chemical in the environment or an
inherited risk factor that you have in
your genome but the the re the reason
why it's not a a a primary or is primary
risk factor is every time you have that
insult you always get the outcome like
we have Huntington's disease people who
have the mutation in the gene Huntington
100 of the people that have that
mutation will develop Huntington's
disease but we have never found the
mutation in cancer inherited that's a
hundred percent penetrant like the
highest level is the Lee from any
mutation which is a gene mutation in the
gene called p53 and uh that's about an
85 percent penetrate meaning 15 of the
people that have that mutation don't get
the cancer in order to get you have
between the secondary primary cause
versus secondary cause primary cause is
there 100 of the time a secondary cause
may or may not be a hundred so no we
have not found any cancer Gene that's
100 penetrant meaning that the inherited
mutations are secondary risk factors
some of them can be very high some of
them can be low like for bracket one you
know fifty percent of the people with
the mutation develop a a a a mutation
develop a cancer of the breast or or
maybe another organ but that means about
50 of the women that have that don't so
so in order for something to be a
primary cause 100 everybody who has that
has to develop so we have inherited
mutations as risk factors combined with
environmental insults that can increase
the probability of of of of manifesting
the condition so you have to weigh all
these things together and every woman
that has a breast tumor whether it's
from chemical carcinogen smoking or
bracha one they're all fermenters so
bottom line is that whatever tumor
arises from the provocative agent the
cells in that tumor will be fermented
glucose and glutamine so you know how to
now you know how to manage them
regardless of what the origin happens to
be but is Baraka not a sort of exception
of a gene that you must sort of look out
for I mean that's one of the reasons I
mean you can test for it but say your
parents had Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
yeah what does that mean for you well it
it you know it depends on the
environment that the person is in to to
generate Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma there
might be some Gene risk factors that
could uh put you at risk in the right
environment but there's no Gene that
will be 100 responsible for whether or
not you get Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or
any any cancer for that matter just to
close off with can you tell me about the
first step of your trial when does it
start yeah we have to write the protocol
first number one number two you have to
have a trained staff of Physicians that
understand how to do this that's that's
another thing and number three you have
to have a place to do this so
um normally hospitals would do this uh a
trial like this but unfortunately we
have not yet found a hospital willing to
do a trial the way we would want to
specify it
that's because of the institutional
review review boards the IRB makes a
decision as to whether or not you can do
something in that hospital
we know that in the brain cancer field
they they will do metabolic therapy only
after radiation and chemo fails which
fails all the time anyway so they will
not allow metabolic therapy to be done
as a standalone it has to be done with
radiation so therefore we have to find a
new venue uh to to allow us to do what
we think uh should be done and then we
have to train people to do it we have to
we have all of this in our treatment
protocol once we have the treatment
protocol published then it becomes a
how-to manual on how to start this and
then we need to train the Physicians
um to know the concepts behind this why
what are they doing why are they doing
it what should they be looking for how
how can we modify the plan uh when we
see things arise it's not like one shoe
fits all
um you know patients have to come in we
do blood work we figure out how healthy
they are a lot of folks that have cancer
have diabetes diabetes they have high
blood pressure they have hypertension
they have all kinds of other issues you
know you got to start managing some of
those things before you can start using
the kinds of drugs that will be
selectively killing tumor cells so
there's a lot of things that go go into
this
um but you know we have to write the
protocol first we have to let people
know if you see this and you see that
what do we do how do we do it at what
point do the does the patient now
receive the kinds of drugs dosage timing
and scheduling of these drugs that work
together with the diet so I'm just
giving you a kind of a snapshot of
what's going to take place eventually
yeah
at just this may have been quite a few
years ago but your question is saying
that you would
use chemotherapy alongside metabolic
theories is this no longer the case no I
think we can still do that I I think
that as again as like I said we can use
far far lower dosages see they have they
have a standards that they uh that are
instituted almost everywhere uh in major
major cities in around the world you
have to have if you follow a protocol
for cisplatin or lock these other drugs
that they have lubastine and whatever
else you know there's a dosage range
from the lowest to the highest
um but you know I think those low doses
can be lowered uh much more than what
they recommend uh we don't need
especially if the patient is in therapy
therapeutic ketosis or water only
fasting you can get that you can these
drugs will kill cancer cells for sure
but you want them to kill cancer cells
more selectively than her arm your
normal cells and that's why when you
transition the body to nutritional
ketosis you give the drugs a greater
opportunity to kill the tumor cells with
less toxicity so that's another phase of
of of of of where we're going and that's
why we don't need much of these
chemotherapy drugs you just need a
little bit of them uh knowing when to
use them and how to use them at what
point
um even immunotherapies like if we have
a raging tumor in a brain or a colon or
a lung and we bring it down to a small
small tiny little spot and we know that
all the cells in that spot will have
something in common because they were
able to survive metabolic therapy you
might now be able to come in with a drug
or an immunotherapy and knock them off
real quick
you just don't do it at the beginning
you just have to know how to use the
tools that you have and right now we're
not knowing that we don't know how to do
that and we're trying to tell people
yeah we can help you learn how to do
this in the best way to achieve the
greatest outcome
foreign